Team, we're all ready to roll.
Morning, everyone. Come on in.
Are we seeing Nick Clark there, Adam? He's on mine.
Oh, right. Oh, there you are. Um, Nick, are you available?
You don't have to yell, even though he's far away.
Yeah, I know. Okay. Hey Nick, you did hear that.
I've been told. I don't have to yell at, but I wasn't,
I can hear you loud. Hey, I
see. Um, thanks. Thank you for, uh,
a substantial, um, initiative.
We've got 10 minutes with you, so you wanna start
and obviously leave a little bit time
for the questions if you can.
Sure. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And, and thank you for to members of the committee
for the opportunity to present, um,
our submission on the electoral amendment bill.
Um, I'm Nick Clark. I'm a senior
fellow at the New Zealand Initiative.
Um, our primary interest is in the bills, moves to address,
um, the problem of the time near to process, verify
and count special votes,
which reached almost three weeks in 20 23, 20 days.
This delay extended the period when the country was in a bit
of a limbo, as we saw, uh,
when coalition negotiations couldn't properly commence
until the full results were declared.
Special votes have grown from 263,000
or 12% of total votes in 2011
to 602,000 or 21%.
In 2023. They could reach 30%
or 1 million votes by 2032.
Each of these votes needs to be processed, verified,
and if deemed valid, counted by contrast.
Many other countries count all their votes
and declare their results in hours
or days rather than weeks.
The uk, France, Germany,
and Ireland, provide very rapid results,
and I think we need to find a way
to reduce the burden of special votes.
So we do support one of the bill solutions, which is
to end enrollment during the voting period.
Most countries, including Australia
and the United Kingdom, close their electoral roles
before voting begins.
Some of them, uh, close their roles quite a long time
before voting begins,
like when they have written day, for example.
Although I understand the Electoral Commission does not
think it would reduce the Tweety Day period,
and I'd certainly, you know, respect their judgment.
I would hope that it would make the processing
of special votes more efficient, especially in concert
with other changes being made by the bill.
It might at least stop the period blowing out further.
We acknowledge concerns about accessibility, particularly
for young and mobile voters, and this is important.
There will remain ample opportunities for voters to enroll
or update their details before the roll closes
and civil society groups should be able
to adjust their efforts accordingly.
And very importantly,
the electoral commission should undertake well resourced
campaigns to inform people of the change
and to persuade people to enroll
or update their details in time.
And if there's a resource issue there, then
that needs to be addressed.
It's also good that people who turn 18
during the voting period will be able to pre-enroll.
That's important too. We support the modernization
of special vote processing, including that they'll be able
to be pre-processed and verified
during the voting period rather than waiting until
after polling day.
And we support having a fixed period for advanced voting.
We also support the increasing digitization
of the electoral role
and move towards, um, an increasingly digital system
that'll help with things like potentially with, um,
automatic enrollment.
The bill should go further,
or at least the committee should signal its
wish for further changes.
First, if other statutory deadlines or provisions
and a lack of resources are impediments
to the electoral commission to reduce the period
of vote processing, verification
and counting, then this, the needs need to be addressed.
This includes where there should be more polling places,
for example, especially for advanced voting.
Our submission discusses how the number
of polling places has fallen over time,
and there are relatively few for advanced voting,
considering they make up about 60% of the votes cast,
and that's even before adjusting for population growth.
Second, we recommend enabling more progress towards
automatic enrollment,
which is also the officials preference.
Other countries have adopted this approach successfully.
While it would require significant investment,
automatic enrollment done well would improve accessibility,
which I think is something we all want.
However, New Zealand does have some unique characteristics
that need to be factored in.
Uh, for example, the fact that we extend the franchise
to non-citizens who've been here for more than 12 months,
which was unusual by the country standards, the restriction
of the franchise for New Zealand citizens overseas two,
three years, because we need
to know whether these people are,
and the Maori electoral option as well,
which is another important factor of, uh,
the could potentially complicate automatic enrollment.
Third, the advanced voting period should be reduced from 12
to seven days, while three fifths of people
with three fifths of people now voting in advance political
parties now time their policy announcements from well
before advanced voting starts.
A shorter, sharper period would
therefore mean policy announcements stay fresher in voters
minds right up the polling day.
And it would reduce the number of people turning 18
who might miss the enrollment deadline.
Seven days of advance voting should be able
to meet voter demand,
and it would still allow two Saturdays
of voting providing continued convenience for most voters.
And fourth, election day restrictions have become outta date
and require review.
There is now fundamental inconsistency in the restrictions
in 2023, as I mentioned
before, 61% of votes were cast during advanced voting
with no advertising restrictions,
and it was 68% of the previous election.
The election day imposes strict prohibitions on statements,
um, that could influence the remaining minority of voters.
Unfortunately, the bill does not address that problem.
This is despite having come up in various
post-election reviews.
As a matter of principle, we believe the rules
for election day should be the same as those
for advanced voting.
Throughout the period, individual voters should be able to,
uh, to discuss their voting choices on social media
and regular news coverage should be able to continue.
An option might be for organized campaigning
and advertising at at least of the more intrusive type
to be curtailed during advanced voting.
But if that would go too far, at the very least,
there should be a prohibition
of campaigning in the immediate vicinity of polling places.
Making the rules consistent, would recognize freedom
of expression while preserving
what they call the dignity and karma voting.
And I guess to conclude we support the bill,
but with changes we suggest, and I think we, we need it.
We need, and we deserve as New Zealand's electoral system
that delivers timely results,
and we need to move more in that direction.
Thank you. And I'm happy. Thank you
Mr. Clark. Um,
I've got a question from Honorable Dr. Deborah Russell.
Uh, thank you for that presentation.
Um, I just wanna hear it again and pretty loud and clear.
This, what you are proposing would entail quite a
substantial increase of
resources for the electoral commission.
Is that something you strongly endorse? Yes.
Especially if say the electoral commission was given
responsibility for local
elections as well, which I think No, no,
No, I just mean for the general election. Oh, yeah,
Yeah, yeah, yeah. But I
think also for the local elections, it would help
with its capacity building and, um, the ability to scale up.
So I think it is those two issues are
important. And so would
You support this bill?
Is that the criteria for criterion for you supporting
that change to advance, um, early voting, early in
Return? Yeah. Yeah. I mean, if,
if, if lack of resources
or funding is a, is a impediment, then
that should definitely be addressed. Absolutely.
Can I, can I just ask you, you the only person
to raise this issue around reducing the advanced voting
period from, uh, 14 days, se essentially to, um,
to seven, which is a mitigation, I suppose, about dealing
with some of the resourcing issue.
It, have you looked at overseas places at that option at, is
that at the period of time we allow for advanced voting?
Is that normal longer than normal
or what? You have a good view on that?
Um, I think a lot of the, I mean, every,
all countries are different, obviously.
Um, I, I think New Zealand does have a lot, a lot of, a lot
of a high proportion of its votes are cast in advance, uh,
whereas a lot of other countries, they still have most
of their votes cast on a polling day, so to speak.
Um, the,
I'm not a hundred percent sure what other countries do
Time. Everybody di
you could send us on that?
Yeah, I could, I can certainly find,
I can certainly find out.
Absolutely. That'd be helpful. I,
I noticed that seven days was
however raised in the regulatory impact statement.
Yeah. But the interest your now I've got question.
I'm very happy to provide that information. Yes.
Great. Uh, just a brief question really.
I mean, you've, you've, um,
made some international comparisons, um,
but every, um, jurisdiction's a little bit different.
And the main comparison is with Australia,
which has compulsory voting.
Um, do you think if we were to adopt the kind
of framework you're talking about,
including what's being proposed here,
we should also be con contemplating compulsory voting?
Um, yeah, I, I, on my, my personal opinion on that,
because I haven't had a chance to test that
with my colleagues, is that the choice of whether
or not to vote is a choice
that people should be able to make.
Um, the, we have a relatively good
voter turnout of the high seventies,
I think at the last election, um, to 80.
Australia gets to about 91% I think, at the last election,
uh, with compulsory voting.
So I guess it would depend on whether getting in
that additional percentage of people voting is worth the
potential, um, you know, costs of that,
including administration enforcement compliance,
and the fact that people might feel com, you know,
that the whole thing about people feeling compelled, whether
that would result in more informed votes or
I, I, I guess if I could just, I guess the, the,
the difficulty is that we've got this, um,
fundamental human right to vote.
Mm-hmm. Um, that's been pushed by a lot of submitters.
Um, and what we've heard,
including from the Crown Law Office, is that the proposal
cuts across that and in fact,
undermined is inconsistent with it.
Uh, how do you deal with that?
Um, well, we do have compulsory registration
and enro, you know, enrollment.
So we, we do have that.
Um, I think that if we have, as I said,
the resourcing and the, um,
and the, the, the efforts to get people not just enroll,
but have their details up to date, um, then it, then it can,
then I think it can work.
Okay. Um, I don't think anyone's necessarily been, um,
prevented as long as they're able to keep their,
their details up to date.
And I don't think it's unreasonable to expect people
to keep their details up to date.
But look, I, I fully understand the concern
and I'd certainly expect the committee
and hope the committee takes very seriously the concerns
of submitters in that respect, as well
as the attorney general's letter
as well about the human rights. Uh,
Alright. Hey,
thank you Mr. Clark.
Very, uh, uh, interesting submission. Right. Thank you.
I've, we've got Mana Michael, is that right?
Oh, you're here. Fantastic. Come to the him up here.
We always come to please.
Right. We've got 10 minutes with you.
Um, if you leave us some time
for questions, it'd be really cool.
Okay.
As Children's commissioner, I'm the independent advocate
for all children in ro in New Zealand under the age of 18,
and all children and young people under the age of 25
who have been in or who are in care and or custody.
In my role, I spend a significant amount of time
with children and young people around the country getting
to know them, their lives, their hopes,
their aspirations and their challenges.
I'm the carrier of their voices into places like our
parliament so that decision makers such
as yourselves understand those realities.
And I advocate for children
and young people's rights to be protected
and respected wherever possible.
I advocate alongside children
and young people on the things that matter to them.
So I'm really pleased today to share my speaking time
with two 16 year olds, hir
and Jamon, who will share their views directly
with you on this bill,
which does have impacts on young people.
Children and young people have clearly told me
and previous children's commissioners over many years
that lowering the voting age to 16 is important to them.
I commend the work of the youth led campaign, make it 16,
who have advocated powerfully, including right up
to the Supreme Court to lower the voting age to 16
and uphold children's civil and political rights.
The Supreme Court has agreed with them that preventing 16,
17 year olds from voting is unjustified age discrimination
and breaches the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act.
It's time that Parliament addresses this discrimination
as Children's Commissioner.
Every day I have the privilege of hearing children
and young people bringing forward their solutions on the big
issues that affect us as a society.
Racism, mental wellbeing, ending poverty,
and stopping the climate crisis.
Children and young people should have a meaningful say in
these things that affect them as current
and future citizens.
And their right to participate is protected under the UN
convention on the rights of the child.
Other countries have already made the decision
to lower the voting age two 16, and we should too.
En franchising young people
to vote means we are future proofing our democratic
decisions for longer, and it is young people who will deal
with the implications of our decisions for the longest time.
I'm opposed to this Bill's proposal
to remove same day enrollments and close enrollments 13 days
before election day
because of the detrimental impact
that this will have on young people.
The New Zealand data is very clear on this,
and I note the Attorney General has found
that this bill's proposal would be an unjustified
limit on the right to vote.
So these changes must not proceed.
Finally, I am very concerned about the impact
of a prisoner voting ban on young people.
And I oppose this.
Young people in our prisons need
to be supported in every respect to rehabilitate
and successfully reintegrate back into society.
Being able to enroll
and vote while they're in prison is
foundational to this effort.
I ask that you recognize the implications
of this bill on young people and reject it.
And I'll now hand over to Jamon
Fountain.
My name is Jamon Fountain.
I'm a year 11 student at Wellington High School
and a regional coordinator
for the Make It 16 Campaign Inata Wellington.
Firstly, can I please thank Claire for the opportunity
to speak in support of Manam Kupuna,
the Children's Commissioner, uh,
the Children's Commissioner's submission on this bill?
It's great to have a children's commissioner who practices
what she preaches by giving space
for young people to speak for themselves.
I'm so proud to speak on the submission
as it clearly articulates the significant moral, ethical,
and legal issues with this bill.
I wish to highlight two aspects of our submission.
Firstly, the impact propo, uh, of the proposed changes
to enrollment to Ranga, Tahi, and Tam.
Secondly, I will, uh, I will focus on our recommendation
that an amendment be made to this bill, uh,
lowering the voting age to 16, uh,
by extinguishing the voting rights of those
who enroll immediately, uh, immediately before
and on election day, this bill chooses
to prioritize efficiency over democracy
as our submission states voting laws that make it easier
for young people to register
and vote, such as same day enrollment,
increased youth voter turnout.
83.1% of youth enrolled for the 2023 election compared
to 80.7% in 2020,
and just 75.6% in 2017, which was
before same day, uh, enrolling was introduced.
Young people are more likely to be transient, less likely
to receive reminders from the electoral commission
and have a range of commitments which may
legitimately delay their enrollment.
Young people are often criticized for their perceived lack
of political engagement, and yet this bill makes it worse.
Stretched parents with hectic schedules, multiple jobs, uh,
and childcare responsibilities may also struggle to enroll,
given the smaller window that, uh,
that is caused by this bill.
This effectively disenfranchises the group, uh, the group
of current voters most committed to the wellbeing
of children, their parents.
Finally, let's turn to our, uh, let's turn our attention
to our proposed recommendation that amendment,
an amendment should be made, uh, in the bill
to lower the voting age to 16.
Can I respectfully remind the select committee
that the Supreme Court has already ruled that preventing 16
and 17 year olds to vote is a breach of Section 19
of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act.
The bill that is before the committee, uh,
represents an opportunity to resolve this, uh,
resolve this breach, uh,
and I think that this should be taken
while New Zealand has a proud record when
it comes to women's suffrage.
We are not world leaders when it comes
to allowing young people to vote.
Today around 20 countries and several states, territories
and islands allow 16 and 17 year olds to vote and some
or all of their elections.
The most recent example is the United Kingdom's, uh,
government's decision that the 16
and 17 year olds will be able
to vote in their next general election.
Most importantly, lowering the voting age
will strengthen our democracy.
Giving 16 and 17 year olds the right
to vote means more voices will be heard,
making our democracy more representative and inclusive.
Right now, politicians can overlook, uh, young people
because they aren't part of the voting population.
But when 16 and 17 year olds can vote, you'll have
to take our needs and concerns seriously.
You'll need to listen, engage,
and create policies that benefit young people.
A lower voting age will lead to a parliament
that better reflects the needs
and priorities of everyone in Altera,
not just younger generations, uh, sorry, older generations.
This means stronger policies that safeguard the future,
better decision making,
and a democracy that truly represents us all
for these reasons as well as the others.
In our written submission, we implore the select committee
to adopt our recommendation.
And in doing so, and,
and in doing so, ensure
that young pe people's voices aren't just
heard, they're counted.
Mihir,
Mihir.
Morning everyone. To those who don't know me yet,
my name is Mihir Jitu and I'm 16,
and she, it is in my best interest to speak alongside Jam
and the children's Commissioner Claire,
about the injustices of this poll
Being done by the Electoral Commission itself.
On the other hand, those who actively come, uh, to
and enroll in order
to change their qualifying address on their own initiative
from 13 days before polling, they aren't disqualified.
I found that total illogical, totally illogical
and manifestly unfair.
The inappropriate and convoluted proposals
and clauses 10
and 12 to give full voting rights to all those in hospitals
and mental health and other facilities while taking all
voting rights away from those in prison
and need to be amended to achieve consistency.
It's convoluted because prisoners have their voting rights
temporarily restored when they go into a hospital
or a mental health institution,
and then they're taken away again when
they go back into prison.
The logic of banning voting for those
because they've been bad,
but welcoming them back as voters, if they're mad as well
as bad escapes me.
The bureaucracy required to apply these strange provisions
and clauses 86 A to k, uh, best avoided
by simply enabling all prisoners to enroll and vote.
And that was recommended
by the recent independent inquiry into the electoral system,
and it would assist the rehabilitation,
the reintegration of prisoners,
and hence reduce the crime rate.
The crime rate, which is something that's the objective,
as I understand it,
of all political parties represent parliament.
I'm generally in favor
of the proposals in some parts 3, 4, 5,
and six with some caveats
and suggestions for clarification,
which I make in my submission.
I also urge lowering the voting age to 16 years as I have
consistently since the, uh, 1997 inquiry
after the, the election 1996
for some part seven, one.
I do not, I do not agree with the continued inclusion
of a clause relating to treating Clause 43
or the proposed new Clause 46 banning the provision of food,
drink, or entertainment within a hundred
meters of a polling glass.
Nowadays, parties and candidates, particularly Maori
and Pacifica candidates are culturally expected
to provide at least some hospitality,
including some basic Kai
and drinks at their campaign events.
It's considered shameful not to.
Similarly, for those who are not candidates, they could,
they can organize happy events in their polling places
to increase awareness of the election,
thereby polling place in the opportunity of voting
and create a bit of interest
that will draw people's attention
and help overcome some people's genuine
nervousness about voting.
And similarly, campaigning should be allowed on election
day, except that the hoardings must come down the night
before, otherwise just consulate defeated candidates
will leave them up forever.
That's my, the other points are in my,
uh, written submission.
Hey, thank you Richard. Um, very good submission.
Uh, we've got one question from, uh, Ms. Walters.
Uh, thank you Mr. Chair,
and thank you Richard, for your submission.
I think you said something very important at the start,
and just in terms of your experience
as a former parliamentarian
and chair of this committee, um,
your reflection on electoral reform
and the fact that there was cross party consensus, um,
Dean Knight did mention this as well in terms
of there being, um, sort of custom in the house in terms
of how we treat electoral law,
and I wonder if you could speak a little bit more to that
as well as the duration of it being considered by
The house. Okay, just briefly.
Just briefly. Yep. Yep.
Well, as I said, um, we spent some time
always, um, trying to, to achieve,
achieve consensus, um, on, on any, any change
to process, particularly ones that might, um,
affect the, um, ability and rights of people to vote.
Alright. Hey, thank you.
Um, very good to see you again
and, uh, thank you for a good, uh, submission.
Right. We're gonna move on to, uh, Mr. Mason Liko,
uh, by Zoom.
How are we going? I try
and get this, yeah, it's, do you want me to say something?
He's online now. Are you there, Mr. Liko?
Yes. Yes. Right.
We've got five minutes, so, um, please take your time.
Kto, uh, Kilda Kto.
My name is Mason Lithgo,
and I would first like to recognize all the other groups
and people submitting.
Many of them know more, a lot more about this than I do.
Um, I do not support the bill
and recommend to the committee that, um, none
of these changes should be made law, um, closing,
closing enrollment earlier
and removing the ability
to enroll the vote on the day will lead to thousands
of voters from becoming disenfranchised
and largely affect minority groups in younger voters.
Um, I've kept some
of my statistics from my written submission
because I find they strongly highlight who will be affected.
Um, during the last election in 2023,
there were 97,000 special votes from voters
who registered to vote for the first time.
Um, and astonishing 80, uh, 48%
of Maori voters aged 18 to 19 enrolled for the first time
or changed their details during the voting period.
Um, meaning that with special votes disen,
and this would mean, um,
disenfranchising these people eliminates essentially half
the voice of a demographic.
Um, students and younger people
as a whole are more transient, living in flats
and moving often, so they have
to change their details hugely often.
Um, and also the last blanket ban,
which disqualified prisoners from voting, uh, 2010 to 2019,
was found to be in breach of the Treaty of Wang,
new Zealand's founding document, the NZ Bill of Rights Act,
our legal framework for establishing rights for citizens
and freedom from discrimination,
and also the international Covenant on Civil
and political rights, which is an instrument
for declaring human rights by the United Nations.
And so I find there is no doubt that another ban, um,
will find these rights to a be breached.
Um, again, I do not support this bill and recommend, uh,
and recommend it be thrown out.
Um,
Alright. Hey, thank
you. Um, I don't think we've got any questions.
It's not because this is unimportant,
but we've, uh, as you've probably heard, totally
Understandable. Yeah. Yeah.
All right. Hey, thank you for your time this morning.
Good Mason. Thank you. Thank you.
Cool. Cheers. Right now we've got Peter Joseph,
who you're trying to get on, joining us by Zoom.
Peter, if you're available, please, uh,
we're keen to hear from you.
Why now?
You there, Peter?
He is, he just needs to unmute. You just need to unmute Mr.
Um, Joseph.
Is he, you still haven't unmuted apparently.
Cool.
Yeah, there we go. It was, uh, not responding.
It was a technical problem. Lemme
The video. That's okay.
Um, good morning. Um, good morning.
Let's let, it's, uh,
it's not working very well, so I'll just go for it.
No, no, we can see you and hear you
fine. So just remember. Okay,
I'll just go for it.
Um, yeah, uh, in summary, I don't support this bill.
Um, hopefully you've read my submission. We did.
Um, I think, uh, at best it's a naive, uh,
bill in search of a problem.
Uh, at worst, it's a cynical attempt to, uh,
to disenfranchise, uh, a particular set of voters.
Uh, I think a lot of the, my, my positions have been shared
by others, but, um,
but it is that, uh, that, that, uh, ignoring the fact
that there are reasons why, uh, the,
the special votes exist, there are reasons why people need
to change their address so close to, uh,
when they cast their vote.
Uh, not everyone has the maybe luxury or,
or maybe simply a choice to be a, a stable in one place
for many, many years.
Uh, people, students, or, uh, maybe someone has just moved.
I mean, with, with so many people at the mercy of, um, uh,
you know, one year renewals on tenancies
and things, you maybe don't have control over that.
So to take steps to make it harder for people to vote,
uh, is, uh, for administrative convenience, really, uh,
is quite hard to understand.
Uh, the reasoning behind it, it seems that the,
it's a very narrow group of interests that seem
to support this bill, uh, ostensibly
for administrative reasons,
but, um, it really does not pass, uh, the, the sniff test
for me, those reasons, uh, given that, sure,
maybe things could be done faster,
but it's better to get it right, better to have everybody
who wants to vote, able to vote then to speed things up,
uh, for the sake of it.
Uh, especially with the numbers that have been circulated
and the research showing that
more than a hundred thousand people, uh,
would be, would be affected.
And it really troubles me that it is limited
to particular demographics.
Uh, so that is my, uh, that's all I really wanted to say,
feel very strongly, uh, that, uh, if we want to hold,
uphold, uh, democratic norms, democratic standards,
and be an example
and try to continue to be an example of the right ways
of doing things, this bill simply is not that.
Okay. Now we've got a question from honorable Dr. Webb.
Oh, Kiata. Peter, thank you for your submission.
Uh, you said there a couple of times that there,
that this was aimed at would disproportionately impact
particular demographics.
Um, what, why would the government want
to suppress voting in any particular demographic?
Well, I mean, that, that, that would,
that's the question, isn't it?
That, that is the question.
Unfortunately, at high level, I think, uh, that the,
the reason governments should exist should be
to make lives better for the people of the country.
Unfortunately, um, my view, uh, in recent decades
of governments of either leaning really, is that a part
of their business seems to be to propagate their own, uh,
stay in power.
Alright. Hey, alright.
Hey, thank you for, thank you
for your comments this morning,
and thank you for joining us.
It's been very good. Alright, thank you, Mr. Joseph.
Now we've got, uh, Mr.
Abraham right here in the seat, ready to go? Five minutes.
Aye. Turn out our Koto, the Justice Select Committee.
Uh, and I will speak to some
of the key points in my submission.
I'm speaking really as a psychologist,
but also as a concerned citizen.
Um, I agree with the Attorney general's view
that this is in breach of the New Zealand, um, bill
of Rights Act, and that is going to disenfranchise,
uh, thousands of people.
Uh, I can, I cannot see why, uh, any government,
and I was quite encouraged by one of the previous speakers
to talk about the consensus amongst the political parties
that it is, is, is a democratic right in this country
for people to be able to vote.
So I'm kind of wondering is, was the intention to, uh,
have some kind of nefarious think tank from overseas
dictate the politics in our country?
So I really hope that that was not the case,
but I don't think it's a good look for us internationally,
uh, to be, uh, designing our system in that kind of way.
Um, in terms of, uh, prisoner voting, uh, um,
as somebody who is very interested in helping people
rehabilitate, take their place, um, back in society
to stand in their manner, uh, I, again, I cannot understand
what the thinking is, um,
by excluding prisoners from voting, um, how that is going
to help them be,
take up their rightful place in society
once they leave prison.
Um, this is supported by, uh, ministry of Corrections
that is recommended that, uh, you know, rehabilitative
processes and rehabilitative programs are far better in
terms of preventing re-offending, then punishment
or, um, locking people up and throwing away the key.
And assuming that they do not have
intelligent thoughts to make.
Uh, there's a very wide range
of people in our prisons from people who have graffitied,
uh, Titi, um, documents to people
who have fines, to people who have defrauded,
to people who've also done more serious crimes.
And we are taking away their right
and their way of participating in society with regards
to treaty, it's in breach of the Tang Tribunal.
Uh, I don't see a lot of consult consultation
with our treaty partners.
It's going to, uh, disproportionately impact, uh,
uh, Maori voters.
Uh, so I, I cannot again,
imagine why you would want to do that.
And, you know, what I see in front of me are people
who do uphold the laws of this country
and want to see a fair and just process.
And finally, the pre-registration 13 days, that
that also does not make sense to me.
Um, it's going to disproportionately affect, uh, groups
of people, young people as we've heard earlier.
Uh, people who live in, you know,
have precarious arrangements, living arrangements, uh,
it's going to affect disproportionately affect Asian, um,
Maori Pacifica voters.
And I, I, um, really, I'm, I'm boggled as to why,
uh, this would be bit forward.
So in summary, I don't agree
with this electoral reform bill.
I think all prisoners should be able to vote.
I think people should be able to vote right up to the day
of of election.
And I hope you you'll continue to consider this carefully.
Can I just ask you a question? Um, please.
In a professional, please.
And, um, I'm not debating, I'm just, is there any evidence
to that supports the view that you've just proposed
around prisoners?
Um, the ability to vote
or ability not to vote is actually bad from a, um,
if you wanna reintegrate people.
Mm, yes. Is there any sort of evidence
that you could help us with or on
That? So, so
in, in, if you want people to be part of society,
so there is evidence in, in terms of, um,
rehabilitative programs are by far the best way.
Even though, sadly, the actual percentages in terms
of the actual variance that's affected is relatively small.
It is still far better than any punitive system are recently
at a conference where
that was reiterated not only from this country,
but also Australia.
Well, if you can help us that actually our prisons fail
in terms of what they're supposed to do, if,
if our prisons were successful, uh, they,
we would not have the increasing numbers in
our prisons. Well,
If you can help us with some of that evidence Yeah.
That would be very useful. Yes. The other thing
that we've never heard, or Yeah.
Is, um,
and again, I'm not No,
no opining on, I'm just asking the question.
The viewers, do prisoners actually want to vote?
You know, even if they're given
the right, do they actually, yes.
And I'm not, don't take that question away. No, please.
It's just I'm asking the question. Yes.
So do look at the references
that I put in my submission. 'cause they, that
That'll be In there. They'll
direct you to some of that. Okay, cool.
I wonder if you, did you see, um, the, the recent, um,
in information about the person who was imprisoned, uh,
for graffiti, uh, in, in our prisons
and their response to supporting that person
and wanting to take a political stance?
Yeah. So there is evidence, yeah.
Even if it's in that anecdotal form
that prisoners are interested in voting, we need
to make these processes more accessible
and to believe that they can actually change
what's happening in this country.
If you want to hear from a, a group that we rarely hear from
that are rarely, and you want to change the systems,
it seems like a good idea not only to listen
to young people, but also listen to who are on question.
Yes. So I, I I think you got
Share with the committee. That would
be fantastic. Yeah. Okay. And
The, the, the material on
your submission is really useful.
Yeah. Thank you. Alright. Hey, thank you. I'm pushing.
We've run outta time. Yeah. But,
um, thank you for your submission.
Thank you for turning up in person.
Also, right now we are on to, um, uh, Ms.
Louise Lin. Are you here? Cool. Yes. Fantastic.
He's been for some time, right?
We've got five minutes. Yeah. Thank you.
My name is Louise and I am an immigrant to this country
like many other immigrants.
Haha. And to iwi, my family came here to lead good lives
because this was known as a good place to be, a country
of justice, equality, fairness, and respect.
This is what I'm here to defend today,
because there is nothing fair or just
or equal about this piece of legislation before us.
The promise of democracy is that we are all equals,
that we are all citizens,
that we can participate in this country with dignity,
and that we have a right to be heard.
The total disenfranchisement of prisoners
and of people who haven't signed up to vote 13 days
before election day breaks this promise,
this bill says some people are deserving of a voice
and some people are not.
It is an assault on specific marginalized groups
of our population.
It is p to see from an incarceration rate
that the disenfranchisement
of prisoners would disproportionately affect Maori.
And people whose special vote are young people,
renters poor people, people who move about
and need to change their address, people with a DHD,
and do things last minute,
or people with simply a lot going on in their lives.
These are all people, this government is saying,
do not deserve a say in this country.
We don't even have to look too far back in history
or sideways at other countries around us to find systems
of government where some groups of people are not treated
as equals or like they have a voice.
Or even as fellow human beings, that is not who we are
and that is not who we want to be become.
You may say it's not a big deal, it's for the sake
of expediency, you know, save us time.
But every erosion of democracy,
e is a step towards totalitarianism
and it all starts with a small step.
And that is not a step we want to take.
I'm not a prisoner, I've never special voted.
You might say it's more about me,
but every time our democracy is attacked,
it's about all of us.
The integrity of our political system
and the upholding of our fundamental human right to vote
is crucial for us all to protect.
I urge you to reject this abhorrent
and frightening piece of legislation in its entirety.
Fantastic. Thank you. Yep. Good.
Um, I wonder if I can, um, Louise mm-hmm.
Because in the, um, attorney General's report
and elsewhere, it's identified
that this will likely have a disproportionate impact on
certain Democrats including Asian New Zealanders.
Mm-hmm. Um, and you know, you've said you're an immigrant
and your parents are immigrants.
Yes. Can you just talk a little bit about that
and how it might affect a community
that you are perhaps better connected with than any of us?
Yes, of course. Um,
I haven't actually the attorney
general's report, so this is, that's all right.
This is news to me, but, um, yeah, so like I'm from Taiwan
and my family are from Taiwan
and yeah, I guess we're connected with like other like Asian
and like East Asian people especially.
Um, it's like as immigrants to this country, we
face challenges and some kinds of discrimination.
We have a stake and we have a say
and we all are here to, you know, live in a good place
and make this place better for all of us.
So I think that's something
that we'd like to encourage and protect.
Okay. Thank you. Alright.
Hey, thank you for turning up this morning, uh, w to see you
and a nice, uh, presentation.
Thank you. Right now we've got Mr. George Bur
he's on online.
Yep. I saw the invitation just a moment ago.
Mr. Barrow, you we're really in waiting.
Mr. Unmute, can you, um, unmute Mr. Barrow?
Good morning. Yeah, good morning.
We've got five minutes with you.
So, um, just the floor's, yours.
Well, I value fair and accessible elections,
but I have also experienced the practical constraints
that voting places operate under.
And that is why I believe
that enrollment entitlements should be more tightly managed
for the 2026 general election.
There does need to be a balance between protecting the right
to vote and ensuring our interactive manual processes at
voting places can operate smoothly.
My submission focuses specifically on
how those manual processes function under pressure
and how we could improve
while managing voting places.
On the final Friday
and Saturday of the last election,
I saw it firsthand the strain placed on our operations,
especially from the surge in special votes these days,
involved very late finishes as we closed off
Friday night and completed all the voting counting
processes on the Saturday, all while trying
to maintain service quality under this drain.
Amidst all of this, we were also processing enrollments.
Some late enrollment cases involved individuals
with transient
or almost unknown residential situations.
I think of one particular example, a person who appeared
to split their time evenly between two cities
without really being at any particular fixed address.
By contrast, the first week
of voting offered a much calmer environment.
If enrollments were to close at the end of week one in 2026,
we would have the capacity to process them in a more relaxed
and considered manner.
Voters could enroll
and vote in a single visit streamlined for staff
and far more convenient for the public.
I do acknowledge the fear much repeated this morning
that tightening enrollment timing could
disenfranchise thousands of voters.
However, with a strong
and targeted promotion of the enrollment deadline,
the number of affected should be
dramatically lower than the figures
currently being suggested.
That is why I urge the committee to consider a shift,
let enrollments take place
and be actively promoted during the first quieter week
of voting place operations.
It could be a practical adjustment
that would ease pressure on staff,
enable earlier validation,
and ultimately produce an earlier final election result.
H have you finished Mr. Burrow?
Yes, thank you. Yeah. Hey, very good. Su suggestion.
Uh, well our presentation as well,
but you, this is, uh, this is uh, uh,
that particular aspect you're just talking about,
that obviously comes from a practical dimension
that you're talking about it.
So you're, you are just,
and we were asking the electoral commission yesterday about
this, the pandemonium that seems
to happen in some rolling in, uh, voting places on Saturday.
You're saying with 600,000
and the projection's going to a million, uh,
possibly at the next election, you're saying that that is,
uh, untenable with the manual
process that you've got at the moment.
You, you, you would struggle to understand
how you're gonna be able to manage that going forward?
Well, it's tough going, I was in a school hall
and we had queues from the front desks right
to the back wall and people trying to get in the door.
True. There was a bit of spillover from a nearby voting
place that had run out of special vote forms or whatever.
But hey, this is the kind of, um, thing
that can happen at any voting place.
At another one I was at earlier in the week,
a woman actually collapsed and fell on the floor
and I had to close the booth altogether.
So contingencies happen all over the place
and you can just imagine people just lining up to do
standard repetitive processes
and some guy turns up at the desk
and you're trying to explain to them how
to fill out the forms and they're trying to explain
that they don't know where they they live.
I just feel it would be really tidy if we could get rid of
that a week before.
Actually. I'm wondering if that's part
of the consideration behind the changes.
Can I ask, um, your experience, we heard yesterday that,
uh, from the electoral commission
that 20 minutes is probably the longest people wanna wait.
You sitting in that school hall
and you've obviously done a few of these.
What's your experience?
Because anecdotally, uh, we, we probably all observe this,
have, do you see people leaving, turning up and leaving?
'cause I can see there's now voting and moving on.
Do you start, did you see that in the last election?
Those types of practical consideration that people say,
I'm not just not gonna invest this time.
To be perfectly honest, I
probably wasn't in a great position to see that,
but I'll tell you what, if I'd been at the tail
of the queue, I'd be moving on
and looking for something else
Or just moving on and gonna have a coffee.
Right. We've got a question from Honorable
Dr. Uh, Deborah Russell.
Oh, um, uh, thank you Mr.
Burrow for all the work you do
around our elections, we need people like you.
Um, it sounds to me what you are talking about
is a resourcing problem.
You just didn't have enough staff on hand
or, um, at the time.
So wouldn't extra resources solve this problem just as well?
Well, all these things are a cost and resource trade off.
Just depends how much you want to throw at at Deborah.
Um, well, yes, but I mean, democracy's quite precious so,
you know, uh, and democracy isn't cheap.
Well, I think we're offering good democracy.
I mean, you could argue that anyone
that hasn't voted on the Sunday
after the whole election has been disenfranchised.
People have to work
to the deadlines, whatever they are stated.
Okay. Alright. Hey, thank you.
Um, very interesting, uh, submission
and thank you for your time this morning.
My pleasure. Now we're gonna go
to the Ton Community Justice Project and you're here.
Great. Uh, Ms.
Uh, Jim Bean. Good. Cool.
Um, can I go to, uh, I'm Gemma
and um, I'm presenting on part
of the Wellington Community Justice Project,
which is a student led volunteer initiative from the law
school at aka um, the dub CJP would like
to oppose the electoral amendment bill on four grounds.
My submission will take around seven minutes
and then I'm happy to take questions.
Firstly, the dub CJP opposed the prisoner voting ban
as a breach of human rights
and the government's obligations under Titi.
It is our longstanding national shame
that our indigenous population make up such a
large proportion of our prisons.
The dub CJP therefore submit
that the ban's disproportionate effect on Maori
participation in democracy is a breach
of the government's obligations under Titi, as well
as our international obligations under the UN declaration
of the rights of indigenous peoples
and the international convention on the elimination
of all forms of racial discrimination.
The Attorney general's report on the bill has found it
to be inconsistent with Section 12 of the New Zealand Bill
of Rights and the idea
that the ban fulfills the government's tough on crime
approach is not backed by evidence.
As per our written submission, we agree with academics,
Eisen Baths, lamo
and Tinsley from AKA who emphasized
that strengthening prisoner's sense
of civic participation serves a rehabilitative purpose
and that the removal of a prisoner
voting rights reinforces pro criminal
and anti-state attitudes.
To be frank, it's a Dickensian look for New Zealand
to be continuing the back and forth over this issue.
The dub CJP firmly opposed the reinstatement of a total ban
and request the government support measures that are proven
to reduce crime and recidivism.
Our second submission is that ending same day enrollment
and making changes to the advanced voting period will
jeopardize the validity
and representative capacity of our democracy.
As per our written submission, we note that 300,000
to 350,000 people will be disenfranchised by this measure,
which may have political consequences in a tight election.
These people are not drop kicks who couldn't be bothered,
but people in stressful financial situations,
first time voters, parents, elderly people.
And as the regulatory impact statement suggests
predominantly from Maori, Pacifica
and Asian communities,
the drop kick comment from my deputy Prime Minister is
particularly unhelpful and bizarre in a country
that does not offer comprehensive civics education.
If the government's desires more public awareness
around the importance of early voting than those other
reforms they should explore.
I have personal experience in this area.
Having worked in the last election at Queensgate Mall
and while hut as a special votes issuing officer,
it was truly a heartening experiencing not only
so many people turn out to vote,
but so many people take the opportunity
to use a special vote for whatever reason it was needed.
Telling those people who have turned out at the last minute
to exercise their civic duty,
that they are drop kicks the mothers
with children on their arms.
The youth, the old men
and walkers, does not only make voting less accessible
for them, but puts a sour taste of democracy in their mouth.
The WCJP therefore submit that
by focusing on other areas highlighted in the regulatory
impact statements such as the time consuming manual
post-election processes, which I can attest to,
will not only have more concrete long-term benefits,
but will not risk voter suppression in the way
that this amendment does.
Thirdly, the WCJP opposed the prohibition of free food,
drink and entertainment within a hundred
meters of polling places.
The regulatory impact statement has called this a blunt
tool, which does not exclusively capture harm
or corruptible behavior.
While the WCJP acknowledged
that the current rule is not well understood
or used, we submit
that this indicates there has not been widespread issues
with treating and that the approach the government is taking
therefore limits the good that free food drink
and entertainment can do at polling stations.
The democracy sausage, for example, is a point of pride
during voting day in Australia that creates a sense
of community accessibility
and desirability around voting when free food drink
and entertainment are provided.
In this way, free from political affiliation
as we argue has been in the majority of cases so far.
They strengthen democracy as opposed to detracting from it.
We also note that practically concerns have been raised
around the disproportionate effect.
This could have at polling places at Madai
that serve Maori communities
by criminalizing cultural practices consistent
with monarchy tanga and providing for mani.
In some the dub CJP agreed
that this amendment is a blunt tool
and that the government should reconsider options
to clarify the rules around treating that are more specific
and do not result in unintended consequences.
Finally, the dub CJP would support the introduction
of mandatory voting as well
as an investment in our electoral processes.
More generally, as democracies worldwide have entered
periods of struggle post COVID,
the WCJP feel it would be beneficial
to follow the Australian model by charging a nominal $20 fee
for failing to vote without good reason.
Good reason, including any voting
and accessibility that can be re deed by government.
This would fuel a greater sense of societal participation,
national involvement and pride in our electoral system.
The the dub CJP feel this would be need to be paired
with some sort of civics education,
which we campaign for more generally.
Finally, the dub CJP feel that a long-term plan
for investment and um, adaptation
of our electoral systems in the face of new technologies
and AI is a better use
of the government's time than these current amendments.
The overarching theme from the official advice on these
amendments are that they are either not supported
by evidence or have uncertain outcomes
and are not the preferred method
to tackle the perceived issues in some
of the dub CJP oppose the stated amendments
and urge the government to do more research
and public consultation
before making changes that feel largely untethered.
That is my submission. Thank you. Right.
Hey, thank you very much. Any, yeah.
Um, thank you very much for your submission.
At one stage you mentioned
that there should be more focus on, uh,
post-election day processing.
Mm-hmm. And what we saw from the electoral commission
yesterday was modeling that showed that even
with the changes proposed, the time taken
for the count would be the same.
Mm-hmm. Um, just as someone who's worked within the system,
what specifically do you think would assist in terms
of keeping to a reasonable period of time?
I think in terms of vote counting, I'm not actually sure.
That's mainly anecdotal evidence from my 16-year-old brother
who works, but he worked long hours late into the night
and it was definitely, he said it definitely got tough at
times, just the volume of work that they were doing.
So I think again that it's,
I feel like it's the manual processes
that are holding us back at the moment.
From my perspective on the day
as a special votes issuing officer, there were big cues.
I don't think anyone left, everyone
was there to do their vote.
I think it's a little bit fast cool to say
that people would just walk off and get a coffee, um,
because they're there, you know,
they understand they're there to do their civic duty
and it takes as long as it takes.
But, um, for special votes currently you have a big fat book
and you have to manually look up the addresses
of people in order to, you know,
and then take down their names and everything.
Um, and you know, and yeah, it's true.
You do run out of forms and you have
to run away and, and go back.
I would say at Queensgate, you know, pretty
big voting center, um, we definitely managed it,
but there was, you know, we think we just had enough staff
and we just had enough paper resources.
So though I would definitely recommend
So either more people or better automation.
Exactly. More resources
or think of our long term overhaul.
Alright. Hey, thank you
for your submission this morning and thank you for turning out.
Right now we've got, uh, New Zealand Council Civil Liberties
online, right?
Oh, good morning,
Koto Qatar.
Uh, my name's Andrew Leston.
I'm the Deputy chair
of the New Zealand Council for Civil Liberties.
Uh, thank you for inviting the council
to make a submission to you today.
Um, the council poses this bill
and sees it as an attack on our democracy.
Uh, a universal franchise is the foundation
for any democracy, and we've consistently oppose limits on
who can vote, including those predate.
This bill, we support an electoral system
that provides broad definition of eligible voters
and enables all eligible voters to be able to vote.
The, uh, council agrees with the Attorney General's Bill
of Rights report
that the bill is an unreasonable attack on section 12
of the Bill of Rights Act, which says
that every New Zealand citizen who is o of
or over the age of 18 years, has the right
to vote in genuine periodic elections.
We recommend the deletion of clauses four
to eight from the bill, so the voting day enrollment
and enrollment after rip day can continue
and to prevent this is an act of voter suppression
and denial of people's right to vote.
We also recommend the deletion of Clause 10 from the bill
and the deletion of Section 80 1D from the Principal Act.
These provisions limit the right of people in prison
to vote, and we've always opposed such limits.
Punishment of sending someone to prison is the removal
of their right to freedom of movement
and freedom of association.
It should not make them citizens who lose their right
to vote and electoral representation.
The High Court Court of Appeal
and Supreme Court have all found that limiting the right
to vote is inconsistent with a Bill of Rights Act rights.
And related to this is the risk that Clause 10 will lead
to a declaration of inconsistency with Section 20 5G
of the Bill of Rights Act by changing sentences which
allowed people to write right a right to vote
to sentences which do not allow voting.
We agree with the borrower report
that this bill is an unreasonable limit on Section 20 5G
and imposes a retroactive penalty.
The council also recommends deleting Clause 46 from the bill
as this would provide prohibiting, uh,
this would pro prohibit providing food, drink,
or entertainment within a hundred meters of a polling place.
Uh, we don't think
that treating is a such serious an issue in New Zealand.
Judging from the statistics that we've seen, uh,
that it merits this, uh, we think possibly the concern
that raised to this is that that raised this, uh,
provision is more likely related to the fact that, uh,
a place was used as a voting place,
uh, at the last election.
That was also the location of the chief executive, uh,
of a particular iwi, uh, uh, or Mariah, sorry,
and that that was the conflict that was really, uh,
should have been avoided.
Finally, we support an amendment to section 60 F
of the Principle Act to change the age of eligibility
to vote from 18 years old to 16 years old.
We support efforts to increase the ability
of legitimate voters to be able to vote
and reject those which may aim to make it harder.
Uh, there are dark, these are dark days for democracy
around the world, and this bill brings
that darkness to New Zealand.
We strongly recommend
that the select committee should defend our democracy
by rejecting this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, Mr.
Eagleson, uh, any questions for, um, yep.
One from, uh, Ms. Walter,
thank you very much for your submission.
I think those were very serious words.
You used, you used the words voter suppression, um,
and I wonder if you would be able to speak more to,
who you think specifically is being
targeted will be affected.
Um, the other thing you mentioned was a declaration
of inconsistency that you all view that
this house could very much expect to have the bill,
the act if it passes, returned back
to parliament if it's passed in its current state.
Yes. I mean, I, I think around voter suppression,
what we're looking at is groups of people that may be moving
or who have had lives, uh, that disrupt their ability
to get back on the register sooner.
I think actually one of, one of the, uh, the ways
that you really deal with this is you simply have
automatic voter enrollment.
Um, I don't think you necessarily have to go
to compulsory voting, uh, as in Australia,
but I do think that automatic
enrollment should be the thing.
It should, should be the way that we proceed
to avoid these issues in future.
Uh, certainly that was the situation when I was
growing up in the uk.
Uh, when I was 17
and still in, uh, secondary school, high school,
I got notification from the electoral registrar
that I'd been enrolled to vote.
And if I was 18, by the time the next election or local
or national was called, I would be able to vote.
Um, so I think, I think there's a problem there in terms of,
uh, ruling out peoples who, whose lifestyles may, uh,
make it harder for them to ensure they're back on a roll
and we should avoid that problem in the first place.
Uh, there's a, there's a border issue there of
who are the demographics of the people that are more likely
to be in that category, um, and,
and, uh, which way the research indicates they might vote
in terms of declaration of inconsistency.
I think that's a real risk, uh,
particularly given the attorney general's borrower report.
Um, and therefore it's, it's a pretty
short termist view of, uh, what will go on because
although this, the government may use its majority
to force this bill onto the statute book, uh, it will face,
uh, uh, a declaration of incon consists
that you see from the courts
and okay, then we're, then we're into a, uh, you know,
the situation with policy and et cetera, et cetera.
It's, it's not, it's not a good situation
to put New Zealand in.
Alright. Hey, thank you for your submission this morning.
Uh, very helpful and very useful.
Right now we're going to go to Ms.
Sna, Fitz John, who is by Zoom. Oh, good morning.
Good morning. We've got five minutes with you.
Cool. Thank you. Thank you for, um,
hearing these submissions.
Um, uh, my name is Tiana Fitz John,
and I wanted to, uh, just start off by saying that I,
I don't have complete faith in this democratic process,
which is essentially set up to interrogate whether
or not we should ero the democratic process.
So I just wanted to, I just wanted to name that before I,
before I continue with my submission.
Um, so I'll be focusing on, on three parts of the bill.
The first, and I think the most, um, concerning is, is the,
is is stopping prisoners right to vote.
Um, I think this is a huge red flag.
It's inconsistent with the rights
and I, I, I was shocked to hear when I was a young person
and, and heard that the national government had refused
prisoners the right to vote, even as a young person.
I was really shocked by that.
So I'm even more shocked
and disgusted that it's come back onto the table,
um, for many different reasons.
Uh, the first being that people
who end up in prison are the people who often
who the system has failed.
Um, they're, they're people who we need to hear from.
We need their participation in order
to make society into a more supportive place
that people can participate in,
in a socially responsible way.
And if we're not hearing from the people
who the system has failed
or people who have been disenfranchised
and have acted out against the system, um,
then we are missing a really, really important perspective.
Um, also, I think it's,
I think it's just completely illogical to think that people
who have been incarcerated
and been denied the right to vote, it's, it's so illogical
to think that they would then be released
and want to abide by society that they had been denied
a voice and shaping, um, shaping
who has control over making those laws.
Um, so I think it's, yeah, I do agree
that it completely countered to the Bill of Rights and,
and it just shows that, that the people
who drafted this law aren't actually seeing
everybody as people.
Um, and I think that's, that's a massive concern.
We need people who are incarcerated to be able to
have, have a voice in shaping this democracy.
Um, and also it's, it's, it's
concerning because it disproportionately affects the Maori
population who we know are overrepresented
in the prison population.
Um, and that's, that's a result
of systemic racism, I believe.
And so, and so bringing in this law
disproportionately affects them.
And that's, you know, that's, that's a massive concern.
It's actually consistent with what we've seen from this
government in terms of, um, trying to suppress the free,
the freedom of Maori in New Zealand.
Um, the second thing I'll move on to is, uh,
is stopping same day, same day voting, it,
it, it, it's a really thinly veiled attack on democracy.
Basically this, this bill has been drafted in order
to exclude people
who the people in power don't think are gonna vote for them.
Um, so if they, if this current government were
to end up in power again,
they would've actually eroded their own legitimacy
for being there by stopping some people from voting.
Because we know that this bill in its current form is not
going to allow more people to part participate in democracy.
It's going to allow less people to participate in democracy.
So I don't think we should be fooled by, you know, oh,
timeliness or efficiency, et cetera,
because I would rather wait five weeks
for the election results if I knew
that more people were able to participate.
And I knew that those results were gonna be more legitimate
because as many people as possible had been allowed
to participate in voting.
And I think for people who are really struggling, for people
who find admin difficult, for people who, um,
are living in really difficult situations, any barriers
that you provide to voting is going to end up in,
in fewer people being able
to take part in the democratic process.
Um, so I do agree with, um, previous seminars
that I've heard that this is an attack on democracy
and this is a very thinly veiled one at that.
Um, and the the third point, the, the raising of the amount
of political donations from 5,000 to $600, like
who do we think that's gonna benefit?
I know so few people who have a fair,
who have a spare $6,000 to donate to a political party.
And it just increases the threshold of, of the amount
of political donations that some parties are able
to receive primarily from we wealthy people.
'cause wealthy people are the only people who can afford
to give $6,000 is anonymous political donation.
Um, this is definitely geared towards getting those wealthy
parties or the parties
with a wealthier demographic even more money.
Um, which in my view is anti-democratic.
And I think there's a problem with anonymous donations
because it allows for people to be feeding money into,
into parties for, um, for essentially for political favors.
And I don't think that it's, that it's not okay
to call that corruption.
Um, so I think this bill should be rejected.
Um, it is an attack on democracy
and it's really clear that the government only want
to exclude people from voting
who they don't think will support 'em.
Um, and that's a massive problem
because who, who, whatever political party I support,
um, I really care that, that everybody is able
to participate in this democracy.
And so I think this bill should be
rejected. Thank you for listening.
Alright. Hey, thank you very much.
Um, we have gone over time, but I wanted to let you finish,
but thank you for joining us this morning
and, uh, passing on those thoughts.
Got us great submission. Thank you.
Right now we're gonna go to, um,
Shana. Oh, you're here. Sorry.
Is you right? Right. Cool. Right.
Okay. Go.
Well, ua, I'm against three sections of this bill.
The early enrollment issued the repeal of prisoners' rights
to vote and the increased level of anonymous donations,
I'll deal with only the first two
sections in this submission.
They're undemocratic and they're a breach of the or white.
Hillary Clinton said, voting is the most precious right
of every citizen, and we have a moral obligation
to ensure the integrity of our voting process.
This bill does not do this if implemented last election
and would've disenfranchised 110,000 people with
that number expected to rise over time,
even if the bill isn't enacted,
the government states the purpose for this change is
for a quicker result.
I don't share that purpose.
I want a system that's flexible enough
to ensure all people vote.
We must do all we can
to ensure this 110,000 people disenfranchised at the stroke
of the pen is wrong.
Just let me introduce you to two of those people.
They're my friends, Nancy, who's fairly new to this country.
English is her second language.
We are trustees on a charitable trust which raises funds
for the Tibetan refugees in Mongor, India.
Last the Nixon, I was driving her home after trust.
Do we have you voted Nancy? I asked.
So no, Sharon, it's too hard for me. I don't understand.
I'm overwhelmed, so I just shut off.
We called into the local polling booth.
She enrolled and voted.
When I got home, my new next door neighbor Alice came
running over Sharon, I forgot to update my arra, um,
enrollment details.
I realized it's too late for me to do so now,
so I can't vote what to do.
My work has been overwhelming in the past few weeks
and my community group project is just so busy.
I told her she could update her enrollment details
and vote today at the local church down the road.
She did. These women are politically aware, they're bright.
So will it happen again?
Uh, hold on now. Members, can you hear us in the room? Okay.
Yep.
Are we there? Okay, we're back on. Yes, back on track.
We're back. Right?
Can you all hear us back on track now?
Um, auto enroll New Zealand. Here we are.
And we've got five minutes with you.
So, so, uh, now we've got 10.
So, um, the floor is yours.
Um, my name is Benjamin Gooder, um,
and I'm part of auto-Enroll nz, which is
a non-partisan group seeking
to promote automatic enrollment, um, as a part of a means
to modernize our democracy.
Um, and we see this as a really important step
that we can take to be in line with many
of our international peers, um,
and a way to uphold the trust
and confidence New Zealanders have in our democratic system.
Um, so our submission today is going to be focused on, uh,
changes around the enrollment period, um,
and what we see as a, a balancing mechanism that would, um,
ensure that there are fewer restrictions on New
Zealanders right to vote.
Um, so today I want to take you through three points.
The first will just be around the up, uh, the importance
of upholding the Bill of Rights, um,
through the least restrictive means.
Uh, the second I want to talk you
through briefly the automatic enrollment process
that is used in Australia, um,
and why we think that that, um, is a good model
that can be used in New Zealand.
Um, and then finally, uh, when we made our submission
to the select committee, we also wrote
to the minister on this issue.
Um, and we've received a response from the minister since
making our submission.
So I want to take a moment to talk you
through the response the minister has provided, um,
and address a number of the points
that he has raised in that letter.
So starting with the Bill of Rights, um,
and our understanding of the policy intention here
is to ensure a robust, modern,
and effective, um, democratic system in New Zealand,
and especially make these changes to improve the speed
and efficiency of the vote count.
Um, and we agree with the Attorney General's conclusion
that the deadline of 20 days appears to constitute, uh,
an unjustified limit on
what really is a fundamentally important right
to vote in a Democratic system.
Um, even if this bill were
to adopt automatic voter enrollment,
we would still have some concerns about the other provisions
and their infringement on those rights,
but our focus today is really going to be on
how New Zealanders can get enrolled to vote so
that they have an opportunity
to participate in our democracy.
Um, and as a part of that, we think that
automatic photo enrollment is a strong way
of moving this bill towards a less restrictive means
of achieving the policy goal that the minister, um,
has set out in preparing this bill.
So onto automatic enrollment
and a couple of the key benefits, um,
that we just wanna recap, um,
that were included in our submission.
Uh, currently there are really significant costs involved
with the administration of the enrollment process.
Um, the electoral commission sends out hundreds of thousands
of letters to New Zealanders who are entitled to enroll
to vote, and many of those letters go, um, without response.
And as a starting point, this shows
that we actually have really good understanding of
who is eligible to enroll to vote in New Zealand.
Um, and we think that there is a lot more that could be done
to make it easier for everyday New Zealanders to get in,
get involved in our democratic system.
And there are also real concerns about, um, the,
the current system in terms of either enrolling online
or through the postal system.
Um, because the 2023 census data shows that hundreds of,
or tens of thousands of New Zealanders, uh,
still don't have reliable internet access.
Um, and with the postal changes coming
through New Zealand post, many thousands
of New Zealanders have less access
to the postal system as well.
So we see, especially for rural New Zealanders,
the current system is, is not effective.
Um, and many of those New Zealanders, the best opportunity
to enroll to vote is
during the election period when they're going out
to a local polling booth and engaging with the system.
And so this change not only, um,
goes against the trend of making enrollment easier, um,
not only, uh, is hampered by the lack of internet access
or the lack of postal access that many New Zealanders have.
Um, it's taking away that the best opportunity
that many New Zealanders have to enroll to vote.
Um, so when we look at the Australian system,
it runs in five steps.
Uh, the first step is
that their electoral commission receives good quality data,
um, from reliable sources.
They use that data then in the second step
to check it against the current role
and identify if there are, um, people that need
to have their enrollment updated
or be enrolled for the first time.
And this is where, uh, the, the system starts
to diverge from what is proposed in the New Zealand bill.
Because currently in, in this bill,
the system is fairly similar for enrollments as to what, uh,
sorry for updates as to what Australia does, uh,
but it doesn't include that step of enrollment.
Um, so in the third step, there is a verification step
to make sure that those people are eligible to enroll
as voters, and then a notification is sent out
by post saying that the, uh, Australian equivalent
of the electoral commission intends to enroll
or update, um, that person for the system
and they have 28 days to provide a correction
or to opt out
or provide any other, um, comment back to the commission.
Uh, and again, that is in line with
what is proposed in this bill for updates.
And then finally, um, at the end of that 28 day period,
if a response has been received, it would be actioned.
And if no response has been received in Australia,
that person would be either enrolled
or have their enrollment updated.
Uh, so we see that there's a really robust process
that works just across the ditch, um,
and is in fact very similar to what is being proposed
for updates in New Zealand.
And when we compare enrollment numbers currently, uh,
in New Zealand, approximately 88% of, uh,
eligible voters are enrolled to vote according
to the electoral commission compared
to approximately 98% in Australia.
So there's a real significant benefit here, um,
and a real opportunity to improve this bill,
uh, and get it closer to, uh, upholding
the, the Bill of Rights in New Zealand's rights to vote, um,
without really significantly changing either the intention
or, um, the provisions in the act.
Okay. And so finally I'll just,
I think we, um, we'd like to ask you some questions.
Um, course we're running outta time.
Uh, if I can just briefly speak to the minister's reply,
I'll, I'll be very brief.
Um, so the minister has highlighted his concern
that automatic enrollment would not allow, uh,
Maori electors to exercise their electoral option
to enroll on the Maori role.
Um, and has highlighted the Maori electoral role
as a unique feature of New Zealand's electoral system
that allows Maori to choose whether
to go on the Maori or the general role.
Um, and we have two concerns with that objection.
The first is procedural.
Nothing in the regulatory impact statement shows
that the minister actually considered that
considered automatic enrollment
or that, um, concern in preparing the spill.
But, but the second is, I guess a substantive concern that,
um, we don't see electro automatic enrollment would be more
restrictive than what is currently proposed.
And that's because from 2023, Maori can
exercise their option to, uh, change
to the Maori role at any time.
Um, and so the option would either come during
that 28 day window where they had received the letter
of the intention to enroll the voter,
and they could reply then or at any other time
before 20 days before the election.
And so we think there may be some Maori voters
who would turn up to the election
and realize that they're not on the roll that they prefer,
but in those cases, it's likely to be people who would,
in the current proposed bill not have any option to,
uh, engage in democracy.
And so we think, again,
moving towards a less restrictive option,
that would be much more preferable.
Okay, we are just a minute outta time now.
Um, uh, just pity weird listening to the um,
uh, electoral commission yesterday
because we talked about, uh, automatic voting
and there's money being set aside for a business case
that was made obvious yesterday.
The issue that the, uh, electoral commission noted,
and that's why I'm trying to get your views on this,
it they have a view, it takes up to three electoral cycles
for that to get to that point of, of consistency
and reliance and, you know, trust in the system.
Do you have a view on that?
We, we think that, uh, the, with the options
that we have on the table, which is going
to either a much more restrictive, uh, system
or starting the process now, the better process is
to head towards a less restrictive option.
And so while we think the status quo is probably
the best option, um, in terms of making it available
for anyone to enroll at any time up until the, uh,
election date, ultimately, if this bill is to go ahead,
we would very much encourage Parliament to consider
what is the least restrictive option for human rights.
Um, and that being the case, we think the best time to start
is now with, uh, automatic enrollment.
Um, and that, uh, the middle ground of
what is proposed in this bill, uh, is,
is the worst of those three options.
Alright. Hey, thank you Mr.
Gooder, um, at nice presentation.
Sorry to delay you through our technical issues right now.
We've got no problem. Thank you. Um, we've got the Quakers,
uh, I think Mr.
Buckman line I saw a moment ago. Can you join us, Mr.
Buckman? So if you are
listening and we've had a technical issue,
we didn't have sound, so
that's why we're slightly behind schedule.
Right. Mr. Buckman, your the floor is yours.
Uh, Mr. Chair, um, members of the committee,
pen Coto Couture.
My name is Gary Buckman
and I will be speaking to the registration
of sentenced prisoners, part
of the amendment Bill.
My friend Shana Ston will be talking about the
organization's general issues with the proposed legislation.
I represent the Quaker community
and am committed to restorative justice, ohgi,
and democratic rights for all, including those incarcerated.
I'm a former convener
of the Quaker Penal Reform Committee.
I spent the last 10 years of my full-time working life
as a field worker for mental two Prisoners Aid
and Rehabilitation Society.
I'm currently the chair of that organization,
which delivers services to
Hawkes Bay Regional Prison, Rucker Prison and Mani Prison.
I'm the chair of an organization that offers accommodation
to individuals recently released from prison,
and I hold a accreditation
as a restorative justice facilitator.
I'm a sworn justice of the peace and I sit on the man
or two prison advisory board.
This bill proposes to disenfranchised prisoners
who have been sentenced a move that undermines both
democratic integrity and our obligations.
Under it is not a neutral
administrative change.
It is a moral and political act
that silences those most affected by systemic injustice
as gi a cautioned distrust, all those
in whom the urge to punish is strong.
This bill reflects such an urge.
It treats voting, voting not as a right,
but as a privilege to be withdrawn as punishment.
That framing is incompatible with restorative justice,
which seeks healing, accountability, not exclusion.
The disproportionate impact on Maori is undeniable.
Maori are over-represented in the prison system due
to historical and structural injustices.
Stripping voting rights from prisoners
therefore compounds that harm,
violating the crown's duty of active protection
under Ang.
It is a breach of partnership
and a denial of Ang voting
is not a reward for good behavior.
It is a civic act, A declaration of
belonging and a pathway to transformation
to exclude prisoners is to say they're beyond redemption
and unworthy of voice.
That is not justice.
That is a, we urge the committee
to reject this bill.
Uphold the principles of honor
the humanity of all people.
And remember, GI warning, the impulse
to punish is not a sign of strength.
It is a failure of imagination.
Koto, Koto, Koto, thank you for the time.
Thank you very much Mr. Backman. Um, could you appreciate
No, Kira, thank you very much.
We really appreciate the Society
of Friends making submissions on this
and really value, um, the views,
the perspectives you bring. Thanks for that.
And thank you for what you do in the prisons.
Um, uh, difficult job, but no doubt a very rewarding job.
So thank you for what you do there.
Right? We're going to go
to Mr. Bennett now, mine.
Sorry, he's online already online.
Mr. Bennett, are you happy to join us? Very good.
We've got five minutes with you, Mr. Bennett, if you need
to unmute yourself.
Hello. Good morning, Bryce
Tardo, appreciate the
opportunity to deliver this submission.
Good to the technologies working at last. Again,
Yeah, sorry about the delay.
That's okay. It's Only Parliament
First, a question to you.
Are the proposals in this bill consistent with the objective
of improving the quality of our democratic system?
The stated purposes of the bill make no mention of this.
If then the proposals here will not make
quality improvements.
They must be rejected New Zealand scores well
and world indices of democracy,
but we must retain the features
that contribute to this ranking.
Quality requires high rates of participation
and transparency like most other submitters.
I am opposed to the proposal in section seven of the bill,
which would prevent enrollment after writ day.
Clearly this would result in lower rates of participation.
There is much I wanted to say about this,
but it has been expressed so well already by so many.
Listen to Judith Collins follow the recommendations from the
Electoral Commission in section 12 of their report.
Speeding up The process to reach the election outcome can be
achieved without restricting the enrollment period.
But there's one comment I must add.
This very select committee
delivered a report on the 2023 election.
You endorsed the electoral commission's recommendations
regarding special votes.
It was recommendation 42, then you went on
to propose by majority
recommendation 44.
The idea now contained in section seven
of closing enrollment on rip day.
Such changes to electoral practice should occur
only if there is cross party support.
Consensus is essential
as Richard Northey has commented
already this morning earlier.
My comment then is that this must not be carried
by only a simple majority.
Promote participation, don't limit it.
There have been quite a few spurious com
comparisons with other countries.
Enrollment in Australia will be high.
Are we moving to compulsory voting? I don't think so.
They do and that's why
enrollment is high without necessarily allowing
enrollment on voting day.
I asked the question too, would the earlier close off
of enrollment actually result in fewer special votes?
From my experience as an enrollment,
as a voting day staffer, anyone turning up to vote
must be allowed to cast a vote.
You don't turn people away
because you don't find them on the roll.
That vote in 2014 would not be included in the count,
but the special vote was still allowed to be made
and would have to be processed.
Now to the other major determinant
of democratic quality transparency,
this bill contains proposals stepping
in the wrong direction.
With regard to political donations.
I refer specifically to sections 119
and 120, which relate to sections 209 E
and 210 F of the Principle Act.
Raising the threshold for declaration
of donations is contrary to improving transparency.
There is growing concern worldwide,
but especially two in New Zealand
that reliance on a small number
of wealthy donors raises the risk
that such donors can buy privileged access
and potentially influence policy decisions.
It would not be wise a wise move for us
to copy much from our neighbors across the Tasman,
but some changes enacted in Australia in February this year
are definitely worth considering.
Australia lowered the threshold for donation declarations to
$1,000
and is instituting real time declarations.
The system of real time donation declarations
already functions in Queensland.
Voters here should know
before they vote, who may be attempting to influence
a party's policies and technology now makes this possible.
I recommend you investigate real time
declaration of donations.
This would restore transparency
and help retain trust in election outcomes
and build our democracy.
Thank you.
Right, thank you Mr. Bennett. Um, very good submission.
Uh, any questions? Alright, I don't take that as,
uh, not being important.
We've obviously had, this is our second date,
so we've had a number of spot, uh, of people we heard from.
So, uh, but thank you and well said. Thank you.
Right now we're going to Marie, uh, LASO. Is it?
You're online. I understand. Good morning.
Good morning. Yeah, you we're,
we've got five minutes with you.
Uh,
thank you so much for the opportunity.
Uh, apologies. In my written submission
where I repeated reason one of four, well three
for my opposition to the bill, um, I wish
to focus on the blanket ban on voting
for people serving sentences of imprisonment.
Uh, as outlined in the Attorney General's, um, bill
of rights advice, blanket prisoner disenfranchisement
is an unjustifiable limited limitation on the right to vote.
Uh, the same ban under New Zealand's Electoral Act in 2010
violated the international covenant on civic
and political civil rights.
And, and now I wish to quote from the abuse
and care, uh, the Royal Commission of Inquiry, uh,
the journey for Maori and the journey for Pacific peoples.
Uh, Dr. Wana Jackson told the inquiry that the removal
of indigenous children
and their placement interstate care is a common
characteristic of colonizing states.
Families are disrupted to prevent the transmission
of cultural values and identity from one
generation to the next.
The intention to take has been the same
as in other countries.
And dispossession is dispossession even when it is carried
out with an aeg honorable intent or kind usage.
Colonization has always been genocidal
and the assumption of a power
to take Maori children has been part of
that destructive intent.
The taking itself is an abuse.
The Ang Tribunal Tribunal
and its Ang Tamari inquiry found
that Te Titi guaranteed ongoing full authority
of Maori over their kaga
and communities encompassing a fundamental right to live
and organize as Maori and the right to care for
and raise the next generation.
Similarly, Dr. Jackson described the exercise of mana
or TGA as encompassing absolute authority
to make decisions about protect, care for
and support the advancement of Maori communities.
Excuse me. And, uh, go to the journey
for Pacific Peoples from the same inquiry.
Uh, Mr. Fafe title told the inquiry that guards at
aka refused to acknowledge that he was samon
and insisted that he call himself a New Zealander.
By removing me from my family, I lost part of my identity.
To be taken away from my mother at such a young age had a
profound and lifelong impact on me.
My mother was everything to me in terms of being Samoan,
being Christian, being my family.
The impact was even greater as there was no family meeting
or explanation of why I was being removed.
Mr. Tit also told the inquiry of another enduring legacy
of his time and care.
The world of state care
and gangs takes away your ability to love and care.
My mother loved me,
but I lost the protective care of that love.
When I was removed
and made a state ward, I learned that interactions
with others should be aggressive and antagonistic violent
and focused on trying to get one over the other person.
As I was developing, having lost the ability to love,
I began to create my own versions of love.
I grew to love violence
and I have quoted from the Abuse Care Royal Commission
as I want to make clear that I believe the Bill's intention
to impose a blanket ban
on prisoners is mere further recolonization in the 21st
century that denies the de direct correlation
between colonization, um, and how children
and young people end up in prison.
And now you're going to, um, if this bill goes through,
you are going to recolonize and reuse, uh, children
and young people, uh, from from Maori Pacific
and other, uh, communities.
So that's my submission and I,
and I just want to ate my opposition.
Uh, Kia
Kira, and thank you for your submission this morning.
Um, uh, that's very powerful what you've said.
I think, um, I don't think we've got any questions for you.
Yeah, I have questions. You okay.
Um, Kura, thank you for that submission.
What, what do you think, given
that this won't speed up vote counting,
what do you think the motivation for this law change is?
Um, I, I, I, I don't know.
I, I I find this, this, uh,
coalition government so frustrating.
It is just another people hating measure that I, I just,
it just blows me away.
But, um, I just think that, uh, they're trying to, uh,
limit participation and re um,
and punish people all over again.
We Can't get a break.
Okay. Thank you. Righto.
And now we've got Anthony, uh, Britton on the line.
Mr. Britton, if you can, um, join us, that would be great.
See? Muted. Alright, cool. Mr.
Britton, we've got five minutes with you.
Okay. Thank you. And council, thank you
for letting me speak to my submission.
I'm not a member of any political party.
I speak as an individual, as a granddad.
Actually, I do not support any move
to make voting more difficult.
On the contrary, we should make it easier
and provide support systems so that people can enroll
and vote to the very last possible minute.
I lived in New Zealand most of my life.
I arrived as a 21-year-old coming here,
lived in, worked in London.
One day I sat in a local restaurant
after doing a night shift at my computer job,
someone came up to me and asked, have you voted yet?
At that age, I could barely organize my laundry,
eat my flat, clean and tidy, or cook my own breakfast.
And I certainly didn't know how to vote.
So that anonymous guy
sat knitted while I finished my evening meal
and took me to a voting booth where I was set up to vote.
And I did. New Zealand has been very kind to me,
not I have to arrive in.
I found myself married into a Maori family
before I knew there was a word for it.
I learned what, what the time is,
and I've always tried to help conserve others.
I'm a software engineer,
so if you told me you needed two clear weeks
to clear a transaction, I tell you, Mr.
You have a very broken system, you better fix it up.
Similarly, if a bank
or a shop told me they need one date, clear a transaction,
I wonder if their system is old and need some TLC.
And I'd also suggest they're not willing
to spend the money to fix it.
That will come to bite them
because of a shop you'd see the Mr.
Elliot ever come to shop here.
If it were a bank, you'd switch.
Banks have a 15-year-old grandson.
On the one hand, he hate being told what to do.
And as awkward as the interaction, the peers,
he needs my help, support, and love.
Likewise, as difficult as it is, though not,
may not see them wearing our favorite yellow, blue
or black Rosetta
or my grandson doesn't yet see the significance
of Sunland being in the Premier League.
But we should be engaging with our young people,
helping them transition into responsible adults for the book
as much easier as possible.
And there are many other possible reasons people need
special support to enroll and vote.
Whether it's bereavement, trauma level,
you just don't know Dr.
Broken It system that doesn't get TLC.
Making it hard to harder to vote can come back debate you
one way or another will all appear the cost.
Whether it's through a more disengaged, disinfected,
disaffected citizenship,
or forks being attracted to lost causes
or worse nihilism through.
Nor these days,
I often hear the term stick to core services
being banded around.
Usually meaning don't do stuff some
politician doesn't value.
We should all agree that the government providing
and funding a fit
for purpose electoral system is core business
for the wellbeing of our democratic system.
There's just no excuse Share.
It's tricky dealing with transactions in real time.
Secure multifactor authentication,
detecting fraud and scams.
We don't have every second of every
minute in our modern world.
It's what we are all come to expect. Young and old.
There's absolutely no reason for you to go backwards
to a stone edge solution.
I
all after that you may eat those that have
yet to make a name for themselves, need someone
of great manner to pa of the way and open doors.
I ask you to reflect on the changes you
are proposing to make.
Listen to the people and seek broad consensus
and cross party agreement when any changes to electoral law,
in short, lead us all to a fair electoral system
that works for everyone.
Now me, he do it. Thank you.
Thank you very much Mr.
Britton, and thank you
for taking the time to join us this morning.
That was, uh, good to hear from you.
Alright, um, we are going to go to, uh,
Mr. Alex Stone.
I see you're there, Mr. Stone.
You were there a moment ago. Do that.
We've got five minutes with you.
Thank you for this. It's a great, um, honor
and a great privilege to have this opportunity
in the Democratic country to make this submission.
Um, my name's Alex Stone.
I'm a citizen of the country, a taxpayer for 40 years.
And I must clearly state at the outset I oppose this bill
with all the strength I can muster
because that's not been about the bush.
This is voter suppression.
It is clearly voter suppression, expressly designed
to hinder the votes of people who might not vote for you
and in a democratic country based on democratic values
and sort of standard bill of rights and so on.
This is simply wrong.
This bill is straight out
of a far right USA playbook being weasel into this country
through the influence of a minority party
that won just 8.6% of the vote in the 23 election.
And it's taking advantage of the weak leadership
of the National Party and the Prime Minister.
It's a clear part of a esque program to flood the ownership.
And it's another human rights outrage, perpe
Perpe perpetrated by this government.
Now, when our own Attorney General says this bill is
inconsistent with Kiwi citizens, right?
We must take heed of this.
The report by Judith Collins says,
proposals under the electoral amendment bill,
including a ban on prisoner voting
and mostly the same day,
voting restrictions are simply inconsistent
with people's rights.
This means that, uh, more than a hundred thousand people
will not be able to vote if this bill goes through.
Um, sure they may have complicated personal lives,
they may not have done their, uh, registration on time,
but that is not the reason to stop people from voting.
You see, I I grew up in a fastest dictatorship,
which was built on the taking away
of votes from some people.
And I recognize the thin end of the wedge.
It is simply quite wrong to go down the street.
And I must be very clear, it's the responsibility
of a democratic elected government in a democratic country
to uphold and strengthen democratic standards.
Now, the argument that it's inconvenient
or difficult to, um, to bring, to hold onto these changes
to make voting easier, that argument is facile
and hypocritical and cynical.
It's a smokescreen
because efficiencies through better utilization of compute
and online systems can be found in our electoral government
system to actually expand voting rights for government
that lords innovation and continuous technological change.
This simply doesn't stack up.
Uh, and if also it's,
it doesn't stack up from the proponents
of personal responsibility like this government claims
to be, it is the government's responsibility
to ensure good electoral governments.
It's actually in your name, you're the government.
You meant to make sure we are governed properly.
So, and in practical terms, the claim
that this change to the, uh, to electoral amendments
bill these changes to stop people voting on the day
or 13 days before the claim,
that is gonna be more efficient.
This doesn't stack up a quote from an ex, uh,
a report on radio New Zealand today.
Quote, the Electoral commission says
official election results won't be available any sooner
based on changes proposed
by the government's electoral amendment bill.
This bill is basically an insidious extension of policies
that dare not speak their name.
Namely that the, the rich and privileged get more powerful
and the poor and dispossessed get less out
of, out of this country.
This bill is a stain on our nation's proud
democratic heritage.
It should not pass. And I end by repeating my opposition.
This bill is wrong.
It is this plain morally wrong.
It must not pass. Thank you.
Alright, thank you Mr. Stone.
That's, um, very powerful words from you.
Um, unfortunately,
and thank you for joining us this morning.
Uh, I'm going to now go to Mr. GREs.
Andrea, I see you're there.
Um, we've got five minutes with you. Two
Kiara. Uh, thank
you for the opportunity
to address the com committee.
Uh, I'm Professor Andrew Gdes, uh, from the Faculty
of Law at the University of Otago.
Uh, just by way of background, I'm the author
of the Text Electoral Law in New Zealand.
I'm Als also was a member
of the Independent Electoral Review, uh,
which produced its report at the end of 2014.
Uh, 2024. Goodness time does fly.
Uh, in my written submission,
I address why I oppose the inclusion of both Subpart one
and Subpart two of this bill.
Uh, and I cause the, I call on the committee
to recommend amending the bill to remove these subparts.
But due to time constraints, five minutes,
I wanna draw the committee's attention
to one particular potential consequence
of the bill is proposed, which I discussed at paragraphs 21
to 28 in my submission.
I note that the bill makes two relatively major changes
to enrollment procedures at the same time.
First of all, it allows the electoral commission
to change an elector's enrollment details,
including the electorate in which they're enrolled
without the elector requesting that this occur.
As an aside from my written submission at this point,
automatic updating is a good thing that I support.
I think this is a good thing to have in the bill.
But secondly, the bill then prevents any mistakes in
enrollment from being rectified during the voting period
because you cannot change someone's enrollment status
once voting begins.
And it's easy to see how these two features
of the current bill may cause problems.
The Electoral commission using data
that's gleaned from various sources
may believe an elector has changed their residence.
And so update their enrollment details accordingly.
However, the elector has not in fact changed their place
of residence as this is defined in the Electoral Act 1993,
section 72, while the bill contains a requirement
that the Electoral Commission notify an elector in writing,
this change in enrollment has occurred
and then that it has, uh, occurred
such notifications are easily missed.
Indeed, much of the problem
with voter enrollment at the present lies
with the difficulty in communicating
with individual electors in a way they actually see as such
come election time, there's going to be a number of voters
who go to the polling place believing they're enrolled
to vote in a particular electorate,
and legally were entitled to remain enrolled
to vote in that electorate.
Yeah. But have been enrolled
by the Electoral Commission in a different electorate.
And the effect of subpart one is
that this mistake cannot now be resolved
because enrollment details cannot be changed back
to what they should be.
And indeed the law would require them to be,
which means their ability
to cast an electorate vote is going to be removed.
And as a codicil to this issue, unpredictable consequences
of legislative change in this area lead to a risk
that problems emerge
that may then found a potential electoral petition.
Simply put the number of wrongly changed.
Enrollments in an electorate may exceed the winning
candidates margin of victory.
In that case, the losing candidate will have grounds
to mount a high court challenge to the result.
And we do not want the courts ultimately deciding
who was properly won an election.
I mean, I think that should be a general rule
across our electoral system.
Therefore, in conclusion, allowing
for the electoral commission updating is a good idea.
It may in itself go a long way to limiting both the number
of special votes cast
and the amount of enrollment updating The electoral
commission has to do an electoral time
because as the bill's regulatory impact statement notes,
most of the election time enrollment work is updating
details for already enrolled voters who've moved
not enrolling voters for the first time.
And automatic updating may well
help to resolve that problem.
Okay, Mr. Uh, professor, um, can we
very important point you're raising here.
So, uh, first question does, does the, uh,
legislation is currently drafted, preclude that, um,
fixing up a mistake?
And the second thing in your, uh, clause 26
with your Dunedin, um, example, why do you assume
that the mail would go to the old address?
Is there a requirement digitally to go to the old address?
Why wouldn't there be mail sent to all three addresses?
Is there again, because you made it?
That's an assumption I think, isn't it?
No, my assumption is
that students do not look in their mailbox
no matter where the mail is sent.
But then are we, are we, yeah,
but are we, does the legislation also preclude that, uh,
any other form digital telecon, uh, tele, uh,
telephone brings up, we heard from the commission yesterday
that they're actually much more active than that.
Sure. If they have the details right, but if they,
Yeah, but are they, aren't they talking about moving
to a situation and this is automatic enrolling having using
some different databases.
So we've gotta produce a leg legislation that's gonna last
for the next 10 years, not the next election.
Yeah. So is there,
the way the drafting goes in the legislation foreseeing
that they will use telephone numbers, they can get access,
is there, is the, uh,
legislation is currently drafted precluding
some of those options in the future?
Oh, I, I think it certainly could be.
My point is this election, this is all going
to happen in 2026 at the same time,
which is a year away now.
Yeah. And get there. So
I'm, I'm simply saying let's have a staged approach
where we do automatic up rolling now,
let that take effect for 2026 with the backstop fix
that if problems emerge, you can deal with
that at election time
by simply changing the enrollment
details at the polling place.
But unfortunately, professor, we heard yesterday that
automatic enrolling, they're gonna start 27, uh, so posted.
So that was one of the revelations.
Oh, I understand. So I agree with you.
I think everyone on the committee would be agreeing
with you saying My, my point is,
because we, it's important that the committee, uh,
future proofs this legislation.
Any specific stuff around that, I'd be very keen
to get further comments from you.
Yeah, no, I, for future,
once they start getting things like, uh, people's, uh,
phone numbers and so on in the database more, then the bill
as written allows for a written notice.
Right. I think written notice would cover a text, et cetera.
It wouldn't, however, cover a phone call.
Yeah. But we, we are gonna text that.
Hey, thank you for bringing this one. You could,
Yeah. Uh,
URA professor, just
I take your point about electoral petitions
and you only need three votes, uh,
that are in question if it's that tight to, um,
but how, in terms of, um,
the wider effect, how broad do you think this issue is?
Is this, is this gonna be hundreds
or thousands of votes in any given electorate
or only 10 or 20?
Well, the thing is, we don't know, right.
Because we haven't seen how active the Electoral Commission,
and I take the point, if they're not gonna start till 2027,
we won't see it in 2026 anyway.
But we, it it depends on
how active the Electoral Commission becomes
in deciding they have enough information to justify
changing someone's electoral details.
Yeah. That, that's a, we we don't know that yet. Right.
No, that's a really good point.
So yeah, we don't even know the size of the problem.
Hey, thank you profess unfortunately, uh, we'd love
to keep talking, but um, I've gone well over time with you.
Understood. But really appreciate
and any feedback would be greatly,
uh, appreciated by the committee. Sure.
Thank you. Appreciate It. Now we're going to Barbara
re, Gil Chris, uh, she available.
I hear you on the line. Good. Good morning,
Risa. Thank you so
much for the opportunity
to participate in this democratic process.
Um, I'm a big fan of democracy,
which is why I am submitting in strong opposition
to this awful bill.
Uh, and I call on the select committee
to reject the proposed changes.
A government's role is surely to protect
and to strengthen democracy.
But this bill does the opposite. I'll say it again.
I call for the select committee to reject these changes.
Uh, I have three main areas of concern with the bill.
The first is that this bill removes the right
of all incarcerated people to vote. Can you hear me okay?
Yes, we can. Yep.
Good. Just you looked a bit distracted there for a minute.
No, no. The evidence against this is very strong.
Uh, both the independent electoral review
and the Attorney General Judith Collins have been quite
clear that this proposed ban is inconsistent with Section 12
of the New Zealand Bill of Rights.
Uh, the NHCR International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, the UN declaration on the rights
of Indigenous people and the International Covenant on the
elimination of all forms of racial discrimination.
That's Article five C.
Uh, those are not small documents that mean nothing.
Those are big pieces of work that mean a lot.
Um, the independent electoral review also say
that given the fundamental nature of the human right
to vote, disenfranchisement should not become part
of someone's punishment.
So this change is not only at odds
with our human rights obligations,
it also risks undermining prisoner rehabilitation efforts.
Participation is rehabilitation.
This fits with the large body of evidence,
which I'm sure you are considering that.